in my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me some advice that i've been turning over in 
my mind ever since. 
"whenever you feel like criticizing any one,." he told me, "just remember that all the people in this 
world haven't had the advantages that you've had.." he didn't say any more, but we've always been 
unusually communicative in a reserved way, and i understood that he meant a great deal more than that. 
in consequence, i'm inclined to reserve all judgments, a habit that has opened up many curious natures to 
me and also made me the victim of not a few veteran bores. the abnormal mind is quick to detect and 
attach itself to this quality when it appears in a normal person, and so it came about that in college i was 
unjustly accused of being a politician, because i was privy to the secret griefs of wild, unknown men. 
most of the confidences were unsought - frequently i have feigned sleep, preoccupation, or a hostile 
levity when i realized by some unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation was quivering on the horizon; for the intimate revelations of young men, or at least the terms in which they express them, are 
usually plagiaristic and marred by obvious suppressions. reserving judgments is a matter of infinite 
hope. i am still a little afraid of missing something if i forget that, as my father snobbishly suggested, 
and i snobbishly repeat, a sense of the fundamental decencies is parcelled out unequally at birth. 
and, after boasting this way of my tolerance, i come to the admission that it has a limit. conduct may be 
founded on the hard rock or the wet marshes, but after a certain point i don't care what it's founded on. 
when i came back from the east last autumn i felt that i wanted the world to be in uniform and at a sort 
of moral attention forever; i wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the human 
heart. only gatsby, the man who gives his name to this book, was exempt from my reaction - gatsby, 
who represented everything for which i have an unaffected scorn. if personality is an unbroken series of 
successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some heightened sensitivity to the 
promises of life, as if he were related to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten 
thousand miles away. 
this responsiveness had nothing to do with that flabby impressionability which is dignified under the 
name of the "creative temperament." - it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic readiness such as 
i have never found in any other person and which it is not likely i shall ever find again. no - gatsby 
turned out all right at the end; it is what preyed on gatsby, what foul dust floated in the wake of his 
dreams that temporarily closed out my interest in the abortive sorrows and short-winded elations of men. 
my family have been prominent, well-to-do people in this middle western city for three generations. 
the carraways are something of a clan, and we have a tradition that we're descended from the dukes of 
buccleuch, but the actual founder of my line was my grandfather's brother, who came here in fifty-one, 
sent a substitute to the civil war, and started the wholesale hardware business that my father carries on 
to-day. 
i never saw this great-uncle, but i'm supposed to look like him - with special reference to the rather hard
boiled painting that hangs in father's office i graduated from new haven in 1915, just a quarter of a 
century after my father, and a little later i participated in that delayed teutonic migration known as the 
great war. i enjoyed the counter-raid so thoroughly that i came back restless. instead of being the warm 
centre of the world, the middle west now seemed like the ragged edge of the universe - so i decided to 
go east and learn the bond business. everybody i knew was in the bond business, so i supposed it could 
support one more single man. all my aunts and uncles talked it over as if they were choosing a prep 
school for me, and finally said, "why - ye-es,." with very grave, hesitant faces. father agreed to finance 
me for a year, and after various delays i came east, permanently, i thought, in the spring of twenty-two. 
the practical thing was to find rooms in the city, but it was a warm season, and i had just left a country 
of wide lawns and friendly trees, so when a young man at the office suggested that we take a house 
together in a commuting town, it sounded like a great idea. he found the house, a weather-beaten 
cardboard bungalow at eighty a month, but at the last minute the firm ordered him to washington, and i went out to the country alone. i had a dog - at least i had him for a few days until he ran away - and an 
old dodge and a finnish woman, who made my bed and cooked breakfast and muttered finnish wisdom 
to herself over the electric stove. 
it was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man, more recently arrived than i, stopped me on 
the road. 
"how do you get to west egg village?." he asked helplessly. 
i told him. and as i walked on i was lonely no longer. i was a guide, a pathfinder, an original settler. 
he had casually conferred on me the freedom of the neighborhood. 
and so with the sunshine and the great bursts of leaves growing on the trees, just as things grow in fast 
movies, i had that familiar conviction that life was beginning over again with the summer. 
there was so much to read, for one thing, and so much fine health to be pulled down out of the young 
breath-giving air. i bought a dozen volumes on banking and credit and investment securities, and they 
stood on my shelf in red and gold like new money from the mint, promising to unfold the shining secrets 
that only midas and morgan and maecenas knew. and i had the high intention of reading many other 
books besides. i was rather literary in college - one year i wrote a series of very solemn and obvious 
editorials for the "yale news." - and now i was going to bring back all such things into my life and 
become again that most limited of all specialists, the "well-rounded man.." this isn't just an epigram - 
life is much more successfully looked at from a single window, after all. 
it was a matter of chance that i should have rented a house in one of the strangest communities in north 
america. it was on that slender riotous island which extends itself due east of new york - and where 
there are, among other natural curiosities, two unusual formations of land. twenty miles from the city a 
pair of enormous eggs, identical in contour and separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out into the most 
domesticated body of salt water in the western hemisphere, the great wet barnyard of long island 
sound. they are not perfect ovals - like the egg in the columbus story, they are both crushed flat at the 
contact end - but their physical resemblance must be a source of perpetual confusion to the gulls that fly 
overhead. to the wingless a more arresting phenomenon is their dissimilarity in every particular except 
shape and size. 
i lived at west egg, the - well, the less fashionable of the two, though this is a most superficial tag to 
express the bizarre and not a little sinister contrast between them. my house was at the very tip of the 
egg, only fifty yards from the sound, and squeezed between two huge places that rented for twelve or 
fifteen thousand a season. the one on my right was a colossal affair by any standard - it was a factual 
imitation of some hotel de ville in normandy, with a tower on one side, spanking new under a thin 
beard of raw ivy, and a marble swimming pool, and more than forty acres of lawn and garden. it was 
gatsby's mansion. or, rather, as i didn't know mr. gatsby, it was a mansion inhabited by a gentleman of that name. my own house was an eyesore, but it was a small eyesore, and it had been overlooked, so i 
had a view of the water, a partial view of my neighbor's lawn, and the consoling proximity of 
millionaires - all for eighty dollars a month. 
across the courtesy bay the white palaces of fashionable east egg glittered along the water, and the 
history of the summer really begins on the evening i drove over there to have dinner with the tom 
buchanans. daisy was my second cousin once removed, and i'd known tom in college. and just after 
the war i spent two days with them in chicago. 
her husband, among various physical accomplishments, had been one of the most powerful ends that 
ever played football at new haven - a national figure in a way, one of those men who reach such an 
acute limited excellence at twenty-one that everything afterward savors of anti-climax. his family were 
enormously wealthy - even in college his freedom with money was a matter for reproach - but now he'd 
left chicago and come east in a fashion that rather took your breath away: for instance, he'd brought 
down a string of polo ponies from lake forest. it was hard to realize that a man in my own generation 
was wealthy enough to do that. 
why they came east i don't know. they had spent a year in france for no particular reason, and then 
drifted here and there unrestfully wherever people played polo and were rich together. this was a 
permanent move, said daisy over the telephone, but i didn't believe it - i had no sight into daisy's heart, 
but i felt that tom would drift on forever seeking, a little wistfully, for the dramatic turbulence of some 
irrecoverable football game. 
and so it happened that on a warm windy evening i drove over to east egg to see two old friends whom 
i scarcely knew at all. their house was even more elaborate than i expected, a cheerful red-and-white 
georgian colonial mansion, overlooking the bay. the lawn started at the beach and ran toward the front 
door for a quarter of a mile, jumping over sun-dials and brick walks and burning gardens - finally when 
it reached the house drifting up the side in bright vines as though from the momentum of its run. the 
front was broken by a line of french windows, glowing now with reflected gold and wide open to the 
warm windy afternoon, and tom buchanan in riding clothes was standing with his legs apart on the 
front porch. 
he had changed since his new haven years. 
now he was a sturdy straw-haired man of thirty with a rather hard mouth and a supercilious manner. 
two shining arrogant eyes had established dominance over his face and gave him the appearance of 
always leaning aggressively forward. not even the effeminate swank of his riding clothes could hide the 
enormous power of that body - he seemed to fill those glistening boots until he strained the top lacing, 
and you could see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder moved under his thin coat. it was a 
body capable of enormous leverage - a cruel body. his speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression of fractiousness he conveyed. there 
was a touch of paternal contempt in it, even toward people he liked - and there were men at new haven 
who had hated his guts. 
"now, don't think my opinion on these matters is final,." he seemed to say, "just because i'm stronger 
and more of a man than you are.." we were in the same senior society, and while we were never 
intimate i always had the impression that he approved of me and wanted me to like him with some 
harsh, defiant wistfulness of his own. 
we talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch. 
"i've got a nice place here,." he said, his eyes flashing about restlessly. 
turning me around by one arm, he moved a broad flat hand along the front vista, including in its sweep 
a sunken italian garden, a half acre of deep, pungent roses, and a snub-nosed motor-boat that bumped 
the tide offshore. 
"it belonged to demaine, the oil man.." he turned me around again, politely and abruptly. 
"we'll go inside.." we walked through a high hallway into a bright rosy-colored space, fragilely bound 
into the house by french windows at either end. the windows were ajar and gleaming white against the 
fresh grass outside that seemed to grow a little way into the house. a breeze blew through the room, 
blew curtains in at one end and out the other like pale flags, twisting them up toward the frosted 
wedding-cake of the ceiling, and then rippled over the wine-colored rug, making a shadow on it as wind 
does on the sea. 
the only completely stationary object in the room was an enormous couch on which two young women 
were buoyed up as though upon an anchored balloon. they were both in white, and their dresses were 
rippling and fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after a short flight around the house. 
i must have stood for a few moments listening to the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a 
picture on the wall. then there was a boom as tom buchanan shut the rear windows and the caught 
wind died out about the room, and the curtains and the rugs and the two young women ballooned slowly 
to the floor. 
the younger of the two was a stranger to me. 
she was extended full length at her end of the divan, completely motionless, and with her chin raised a 
little, as if she were balancing something on it which was quite likely to fall. if she saw me out of the 
corner of her eyes she gave no hint of it - indeed, i was almost surprised into murmuring an apology for 
having disturbed her by coming in. the other girl, daisy, made an attempt to rise - she leaned slightly forward with a conscientious 
expression - then she laughed, an absurd, charming little laugh, and i laughed too and came forward into 
the room. 
"i'm p-paralyzed with happiness.." she laughed again, as if she said something very witty, and held my 
hand for a moment, looking up into my face, promising that there was no one in the world she so much 
wanted to see. that was a way she had. she hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl 
was baker. (i've heard it said that daisy's murmur was only to make people lean toward her; an 
irrelevant criticism that made it no less charming.) at any rate, miss baker's lips fluttered, she nodded at 
me almost imperceptibly, and then quickly tipped her head back again - the object she was balancing 
had obviously tottered a little and given her something of a fright. again a sort of apology arose to my 
lips. almost any exhibition of complete self-sufficiency draws a stunned tribute from me. 
i looked back at my cousin, who began to ask me questions in her low, thrilling voice. it was the kind of 
voice that the ear follows up and down, as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be 
played again. her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it, bright eyes and a bright passionate 
mouth, but there was an excitement in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget: 
a singing compulsion, a whispered "listen,." a promise that she had done gay, exciting things just a 
while since and that there were gay, exciting things hovering in the next hour. 
i told her how i had stopped off in chicago for a day on my way east, and how a dozen people had sent 
their love through me. 
"do they miss me?." she cried ecstatically. 
"the whole town is desolate. all the cars have the left rear wheel painted black as a mourning wreath, 
and there's a persistent wail all night along the north shore.." "how gorgeous! let's go back, tom. to
morrow!." then she added irrelevantly: "you ought to see the baby.." "i'd like to.." "she's asleep. she's 
three years old. haven't you ever seen her?." "never.." "well, you ought to see her. she's - -." tom 
buchanan, who had been hovering restlessly about the room, stopped and rested his hand on my 
shoulder. 
"what you doing, nick?." "i'm a bond man.." "who with?." i told him. 
"never heard of them,." he remarked decisively. 
this annoyed me. 
"you will,." i answered shortly. 
"you will if you stay in the east.." "oh, i'll stay in the east, don't you worry,." he said, glancing at daisy 
and then back at me, as if he were alert for something more. "i'd be a god damned fool to live anywhere else.." at this point miss baker said: "absolutely!." with 
such suddenness that i started - it was the first word she uttered since i came into the room. 
evidently it surprised her as much as it did me, for she yawned and with a series of rapid, deft 
movements stood up into the room. 
"i'm stiff,." she complained, "i've been lying on that sofa for as long as i can remember.." "don't look at 
me,." daisy retorted, "i've been trying to get you to new york all afternoon.." "no, thanks,." said miss 
baker to the four cocktails just in from the pantry, "i'm absolutely in training.." her host looked at her 
incredulously. 
"you are!." he took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bottom of a glass. 
"how you ever get anything done is beyond me.." i looked at miss baker, wondering what it was she 
"got done.." i enjoyed looking at her. she was a slender, small-breasted girl, with an erect carriage, 
which she accentuated by throwing her body backward at the shoulders like a young cadet. 
her gray sun-strained eyes looked back at me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming, 
discontented face. it occurred to me now that i had seen her, or a picture of her, somewhere before. 
"you live in west egg,." she remarked contemptuously. 
"i know somebody there.." "i don't know a single - -." "you must know gatsby.." "gatsby?." demanded 
daisy. 
"what gatsby?." before i could reply that he was my neighbor dinner was announced; wedging his 
tense arm imperatively under mine, tom buchanan compelled me from the room as though he were 
moving a checker to another square. 
slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips, the two young women preceded us out onto a 
rosy-colored porch, open toward the sunset, where four candles flickered on the table in the diminished 
wind. 
"why candles?." objected daisy, frowning. she snapped them out with her fingers. 
"in two weeks it'll be the longest day in the year.." she looked at us all radiantly. 
"do you always watch for the longest day of the year and then miss it? i always watch for the longest 
day in the year and then miss it.." "we ought to plan something,." yawned miss baker, sitting down at 
the table as if she were getting into bed.